[docs-only] Dev docs about collaborative storage (#9317)
owncloud/ocis: docs/architecture/posixfs.md

---
title: "Posix Filesystem"
date: 2024-05-27T14:31:00+01:00
weight: 30
geekdocRepo: https://github.com/owncloud/ocis
geekdocEditPath: edit/master/docs/architecture
geekdocFilePath: posixfs.md
---

{{< toc >}}

> Posix FS is the working name for the collaborative storage driver for Infinite Scale.

Reviewer: POSIX is IMHO the correct technical term. It makes the difference between Decomposed vs. POSIX

> The scope of this document is to give an high level overview to the technical aspects of the Posix FS and guide the setup.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The scope of this document is to give a high level overview to the technical aspects of the Posix FS and guide the setup.
```

## Introduction

> Posix FS is a backend component that manages files on the server utilizing a "real" file tree that represents the data with folders and files in the file system as users are used to it. That is the big difference compared to Decomposed FS which is the default storage driver in Infinite Scale.

Reviewer 3: Looking into the dev docs and searching for `decomposed`, I only find [Decomposed FS on NFS](https://owncloud.dev/ocis/storage-backends/dcfsnfs/). We should add a new documentation about Decomposed FS, what it is about and link that document here for reference so one can compare. This is especially true as Decomposed FS uses POSIX (eg NFS) for metadata stored via messagepack and this new FS driver uses XATTRs as part of the files stored.

> This does not mean that Infinte Scale is trading any of it's benefits to this new feature: It still implements simplicity by running without a database, it continues to store metadata in the file system and adds them transparently to chaches and search index, and it also features the full spaces concept as before, just to name a few example.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This does not mean that Infinte Scale is trading any of its benefits to this new feature: It still implements simplicity by running without a database, it continues to store metadata in the file system and adds them transparently to chaches and search index, and it also features the full spaces concept as before, just to name a few example.
```

> This does not mean that Infinte Scale is trading any of it's benefits to this new feature: It still implements simplicity by running without a database, it continues to store metadata in the file system and adds them transparently to chaches and search index, and it also features the full spaces concept as before, just to name a few example.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This does not mean that Infinite Scale is trading any of it's benefits to this new feature: It still implements simplicity by running without a database, it continues to store metadata in the file system and adds them transparently to caches and search indexes, and it also features the full spaces concept as before, just to name a few examples.
```

> The architecture of Infinite Scale allows to configure different storage drivers for specific storage types and purposes on a space granularity. The Posix FS storage driver is an alternative to the default driver called Decomposed FS.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The architecture of Infinite Scale allows configuring different storage drivers for specific storage types and purposes on a space granularity. The Posix FS storage driver is an alternative to the default driver called Decomposed FS.
```

> However, the clearance of the file structure in the underlying file system is not the only benefit of the Posix FS. This new technology allows users to manipulate the data directly in the file system, and any changes to files made aside of Infinite Scale are monitored and directly reflected in Infinite Scale.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, the clarity of the file structure in the underlying file system is not the only benefit of the Posix FS. This new technology allows users to manipulate the data directly in the file system, and any changes to files made aside of Infinite Scale are monitored and directly reflected in Infinite Scale.
```

Maybe you mean something like "clarity"?

> However, the clearance of the file structure in the underlying file system is not the only benefit of the Posix FS. This new technology allows users to manipulate the data directly in the file system, and any changes to files made aside of Infinite Scale are monitored and directly reflected in Infinite Scale.

Author: added a sentence with a real life example (scanner)

> The first time ever with feature rich open source file synce & share systems, users can either choose to work with their data through the clients of the system, it's API's or even directly in the underlying file system on the server.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The first time ever with feature rich open source file synce & share systems, users can either choose to work with their data through the clients of the system, its APIs or even directly in the underlying file system on the server.
```

> The first time ever with feature rich open source file synce & share systems, users can either choose to work with their data through the clients of the system, it's API's or even directly in the underlying file system on the server.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the first time ever with feature rich open source file sync & share systems, users can either choose to work with their data through the clients of the system, it's API's or even directly in the underlying file system on the server.
```

> That is another powerful vector for integration and enables a new spectrum of use cases across all domains. Just imagine how many software can write files, and can now directly make them accessible real time in a convenient, secure and efficient way.

Reviewer 4: > Just imagine how many software can write files, and can now directly make them accessible real time in a convenient, secure and efficient way.

This I don't understand. Are you talking about other competitors who can't do this?

> That is another powerful vector for integration and enables a new spectrum of use cases across all domains. Just imagine how many software can write files, and can now directly make them accessible real time in a convenient, secure and efficient way.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That is another powerful vector for integration and enables a new spectrum of use cases across all domains. Just imagine how many pieces of software can write files, and can now directly make them accessible real time in a convenient, secure and efficient way.
```

I'm not sure about the value of adding words here to force it to be "grammatically correct". 
"how many software" will be understood in the modern world.

## Technical Aspects

The Posix FS technology uses a few features of the underlying file system, which are mandatory and directly contributing to the performance of the system.

> While the simplest form of Posix FS runs with default file systems of every modern Linux system, the full power of this unfolds with more capable file systems such as IBM Storage Scale or Ceph. These are recommended as reliable foundations for big installations of Infinite Scale.

Reviewer 3: Do "default filesystems" include mounted shared file systems like NFS or SMB ?
If yes, this should be added.
I remember, that NFS needs a minimum version (v4.1 or 4.2?) to support xattrs which was some time ago one important reason to move to messagepack. If a minimum version of a mounted FS is still valid, we should add a note about that. Else one thinks NFSv3 is ok to use. No need to go into a detail, but a note about a min versions would be necessary - also for us...

This chapter describes some technical aspects of the storage driver.

### Path Locations

The file tree that is used as storage path for both data and metadata is located under the local path on the machine that is running Infinite Scale. That might either be a real local file system or a mounted net filesystem. It is expected that oCIS is the only consumer of that file tree, except what is expected behaviour with a collaborative file system, that works with files in that tree.

Underneath the Infinite Scale file system root, there is a collection of different folders containing Infinite Scale specific data storing personal spaces, project spaces and indexes.

### Metadata

Infinite Scale is highly dependent on the efficient usage of meta data which are attached to file resources, but also logical elements such as spaces.

> Metadata are stored in extended attributes (as also supported by decompsed FS) which poses the benefit that metadata is always directly attached to the actual resources. As a result care has to be taken that extended attributes are considered when working with the file tree however, e.g. when creating or restoring backups.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Metadata are stored in extended attributes (as also supported by decomposed FS) which provides the benefit that metadata is always directly attached to the actual resources. As a result care has to be taken that extended attributes are considered when working with the file tree however, e.g. when creating or restoring backups.
```

Note: The maximum number and size of extended attributes are limited depending on the filesystem and block size. See [GPFS Specifics](#gpfs-specifics) for more details on GPFS file systems.

All indexing and caching of metadata is implemented in higher system levels than the storage driver, and thus are not different to the components used with other storage drivers like the decomposed FS.

### Monitoring

> To get information about changes such as new files added, files edited or removed, Infinte Sale uses a monitoring system to directly watch the file system. This starts with the Linux inotify system and ranges to much more sophisticated services as for example in Spectrum Scale (see [GPFS Specifics](#gpfs-specifics) for more details on GPFS file systems).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To get information about changes such as new files added, files edited or removed, Infinite Sale uses a monitoring system to directly watch the file system. This starts with the Linux inotify system and ranges to much more sophisticated services as, for example, in Spectrum Scale (see [GPFS Specifics](#gpfs-specifics) for more details on GPFS file systems).
```

Reviewer 5: There's another typo here `Infinite Sale`

Based on the information transmitted by the watching service, Infinite Scale is able to "register" new or changed files into its own caches and internal management structures. This enables Infinite Scale to deliver resource changes through the "traditional" channels such as APIs and clients.

> Since the most important metadata is the file tree structure itself, the "split brain" situation between data and metadata is impossible to cause trouble.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since the most important metadata is the file tree structure itself, it is impossible for the "split brain" situation between data and metadata to cause trouble.
```

### Automatic ETag Propagation

> The ETag of a resource can be understood as a content fingerprint of any file- or folder resource in Infinite Scale. It is mainly used by clients to detect changes of resources. The rule is that if the content of a file changed the ETag has to change as well, as well as the ETag of all parent folders up to the root of the space.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The ETag of a resource can be understood as a content fingerprint of any file- or folder resource in Infinite Scale. It is mainly used by clients to detect changes of resources. The rule is, that if the content of a file changed, the ETag has to change as well, as well as the ETag of all parent folders up to the root of the space.
```

Infinite Scale uses a built in mechanism to maintain the ETag for each resource in the file meta data, and also propagates it automatically.

> In the future a sophisticated underlying file system could provide an attribute that fulfills this requirement and changes whenever content or metadata of a resource changes, and - which is most important - also changes the attribute of the parent resource and the parent of the parent etc.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the future, a sophisticated underlying file system could provide an attribute that fulfills this requirement and changes whenever content or metadata of a resource changes, and - which is most important - also changes the attribute of the parent resource and the parent of the parent etc.
```

### Automatic Tree Size Propagation

Similar to the ETag propagation described before, Infinite Scale also tracks the accumulated tree size in all nodes of the file tree. A change to any file requires a re-calculation of the size attribute in all parent folders.

> In the future Infinite Scale could benefit from file systems with native tree size propagation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the future, Infinite Scale could benefit from file systems with native tree size propagation.
```

### Quota

Each space has it's own quota, thus every storage driver implementation needs to consider that.

For example, IBM Spectrum Scale supports quota handling directly in the file system.

Other systems store quota data in the metadata storage and implement propagation of used quota similar to the tree size propagation.

> ### File Id Resolution

Reviewer 3: Not sure, but should we write `File ID Resolution` (ID in capital letters).

Author: ok

> Infinite Scale uses an Id based approach to work with resources, rather than a file path based mechanism. The reason for that is that Id based lookups can be done way more efficient compared to tree traversals, just to name one reason.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Infinite Scale uses an Id based approach to work with resources, rather than a file path based mechanism. The reason for that is that Id based lookups can be done way more efficiently compared to tree traversals, just to name one reason.
```

The most important component of the Id is a unique file Id that identifies the resource within a space. Ideally the Inode of a file could be used here. However, some file systems re-use inodes which must be avoided. Infinite Scale thus does not use the file Inode, but generates a UUID instead.

ID based lookups utilize an Id cache which needs to be shared between all storageprovider and dataprovider instances. During startup a scan of the whole file tree is performed to detect and cache new entities.

In the future a powerful underlying file system could support Infinite Scale by providing an API that

1. Provides the Id for a given file path referenced resource
2. Provides the path for a given Id.

These two operations are very crucial for the performance of the entire system.

### User Management

> With the requirement that data can be manipulated either through the filesystem or the Infinite Scale system, the question under which uid the manipulation happens is an important question.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With the requirement that data can be manipulated either through the filesystem or the Infinite Scale system, the question under which uid the manipulation happens is important.
```

Author: :+1:

There are a few possible ways for user management:

> 1. Changes can either be only accepted by the same  user that Infinite Scale is running under, for example the user `ocis`. All manipulations in the filesystem have to be done by, and only by, this user.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Changes can either be only accepted by the same  user that Infinite Scale is running under, for example the user `ocis`. All manipulations in the filesystem have to be done by, and only by this user.
```

> 2. Group based: All users who should be able to manipulate files have to be in a unix group. The Infinite Scale user has also to be in there. The default umask in the directory used has to allow group writing all over the place.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Group based: All users who should be able to manipulate files have to be in a unix group. The Infinite Scale user has also to be member of that group. The default umask in the directory used has to allow group writing all over the place.
```

Author: :+1:

3. Impersonation: Infinite Scale impersonates the user who owns the folder on the file system to mimic the access as the user.

All possibilities have pros and cons for operations.

One for all, it seems reasonable to use LDAP to manage users which is the base for the Infinite Scale IDP as well as the system login system via PAM.

## Advanced Features

> Depending on the capabilities of the underlying file system, the Infinite Scale PosixFS can benefit from more advanced funcitonality described here.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Depending on the capabilities of the underlying file system, the Infinite Scale PosixFS can benefit from more advanced functionality described here.
```
I knew I could find a typo if I only looked hard enough!

### Versioning

> If the underlying file system is able to create versions of single resources (imagine a git based file system) this functionality could directly be used by Infinite Scale.
> 
> In the current state of the PosixFS, versioning is not supported.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the current state of the PosixFS, versioning is not supported.

If the underlying file system is able to create versions of single resources (imagine a git based file system) this functionality could directly be used by Infinite Scale provided in a later version.
```
Switching the order. imho no candy and then currently not possible...

Author: hm, I have the same sequence in other locations, so I'd like to stay with it.

### Trashbin

> If the underlying file system handles deleted files in a trash bin that allows restoring of previously removed files, this functionality could directly be used by Infinite Scale.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the underlying file system handles deleted files in a trash bin that allows restoring of previously removed files, this functionality can directly be used by Infinite Scale.
```

> If not available it will follow the [the Free Desktop Trash specificaton](https://specifications.freedesktop.org/trash-spec/trashspec-latest.html).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If not available, it will follow the [Free Desktop Trash specificaton](https://specifications.freedesktop.org/trash-spec/trashspec-latest.html).
```

> If the underlying file system handles deleted files in a trash bin that allows restoring of previously removed files, this functionality could directly be used by Infinite Scale.
> 
> If not available it will follow the [the Free Desktop Trash specificaton](https://specifications.freedesktop.org/trash-spec/trashspec-latest.html).
> 
> In the current state of the PosixFS, trash bin is not supported.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the current state of the PosixFS, trash bin is not supported.

Infinite Scale could, if provided by a later version:

- If the underlying file system handles deleted files in a trash bin that allows restoring of previously removed files, this functionality could directly be used by Infinite Scale.
- If not available it will follow the [Free Desktop Trash specificaton](https://specifications.freedesktop.org/trash-spec/trashspec-latest.html).
```

Author: same here

## Limitations

> As of Q2/2024 the PosixFS is in technical preview state which means that it is not officially supported.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As of Q2/2024 the PosixFS is not officially supported and in technical preview state.
```

The tech preview comes with the following limitations:

> 1. User Management: Manipulations in the file system have to be done by the same user that runs Infinte Scale

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. User Management: Manipulations in the file system have to be done by the same user that runs Infinite Scale
```

2. Only inotify and GPFS file system change notification methods are supported
3. Advanced features versioning and trashbin are not supported yet
4. The space/project folders in the filesystem are named after the UUID, not the real space name
5. No CephFS support yet

## Setup

This describes the steps to use the PosixFS storage driver with Infinite Scale.

It is possible to use different storage drivers in the same Infinite Scale installation. For example it is possible to set up one space running on PosixFS while others run decomposedFS.

### Prerequisites

To run PosixFS, the following prerequisites have to be fulfilled:

1. There must be storage available to store meta data and blobs, available under a root path
2. When using inotify, the storage must be local on the same machine. Network mounts do not work with Inotify
3. The storage root path must be writeable and executable by the same user Infinite Scale is running under

> 4. An appropiate version of Infinte Scale is installed, version number 5.0.5 and later

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. An appropiate version of Infinite Scale is installed, version number 5.0.5 and later
```

> 5. Either redis or nats-js-kv cache service

Reviewer 4: Please don't mention `redis`. It is not working properly. We want to use `nats-js-kv` as only suggested distributed cache solution.
